.. _release-v17-0:

Spring 2019 Release (v17_0)
===========================

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 17.0       |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v17\_0     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+

- :ref:`release-v17-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-deprecations`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-1-patch`

*See also:*


- :doc:`Installation instructions <../install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-131) <https://ls.st/DMTR-131>`_
- `Doxygen Documentation <http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_master_2019_02_15_09.16.46/>`_

These release notes highlight significant changes to the Science Pipelines codebase which are likely to be of wide interest.
For a complete list of changes, see :ref:`release-v17-0-tickets`.

.. _release-v17-0-functionality:

Major Functionality Changes
---------------------------

- :ref:`release-v17-0-proper-motion`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-ingestDriver`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-runIsr`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-ap`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-obs-lsst`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-dcr`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-ppmb`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-gen3`

.. _release-v17-0-proper-motion:

Proper motion support added to reference catalogs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reference catalogs now support providing proper motions and parallaxes.
If proper motions are available, then it will be applied to the specified epoch when the catalog is read.
No correction for parallax is currently made.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-368`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/proper-motion-support-added-to-reference-catalogs/3215

.. _release-v17-0-ingestDriver:

Parallelized image ingest
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The new ``ingestDriver.py`` command makes it possible to ingest images to a data repository in parallel, providing significant speed-ups.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/introducing-ingestdriver-py/2599

.. _release-v17-0-runIsr:

Stand-alone instrument signature removal
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The new ``runIsr.py`` command makes it possible to run instrument signature removal (ISR) from the command line.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/runisr-py-can-now-run-stand-alone-isr-processing-from-the-command-line/3275

.. _release-v17-0-ap:

Alert production capabilities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The prototype Alert Production Pipeline is now included in the Science Pipelines software distribution.
This comprises three new software packages:

- dax_ppdb implements the Prompt Products Database;
- ap_association implements multiple DIASource detections to compose DIAObjects;
- ap_pipe provides command-line tasks to orchestrate the pipeline, running CCD processing, image differencing, and source association.

For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-521`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/ap-pipeline-now-in-the-stack/3298

.. _release-v17-0-obs-lsst:

obs_lsst camera package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This release provides ``obs_lsst```, a new camera description and configuration package which will provide support for data from the LSST Camera, ComCam, the Auxiliary Telescope camera, camera test stand 8, ImSim, and PhoSim.
This package is expected to be updated and maintained for the indefinite future.
Previous packages which provide some of the same functionality (e.g. obs_lsstSim) are provided with this release, but will ultimately be deprecated.
For more information, refer to the documentation for :ref:`lsst.obs.lsst`.

.. _release-v17-0-dcr:

DCR-corrected template construction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This release contains code for generating image differencing templates corrected for the effects of differential chromatic refraction (DCR).
For information about the technique adopted, refer to :dmtn:`037`; for documentation on the code, see `lsst.ip.diffim.DcrModel`.

.. _release-v17-0-ppmb:

The “Pessimistic Pattern Matcher b” is now the default astrometric matcher
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This new matcher works consistently over the large range of stellar densities which LSST will observe.
The algorithm and associated validation testing are described in :dmtn:`031`; for more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/new-astrometric-matcher-is-now-the-default/3559

.. _release-v17-0-gen3:

“Generation 3” middleware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This release contains early versions of the “Generation 3” Data Butler and ```PipelineTask``` middleware, which are being developed to satisify the requirements described in :ldm:`556`.
This software is still under heavy development and is not currently deployed for regular data processing by the Data Management team; it should be regarded here as an unsupported preview.
For more information, refer to the documentation for :ref:`lsst.pipe.base` and :ref:`lsst.daf.butler`.

.. _release-v17-0-interface:

Significant Interface Changes
-----------------------------

- :ref:`release-v17-0-runDataRef`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-table-fields`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-inverted`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-calibration-flags`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-blendedness-flags`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-task-metadata`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-pybind11`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-astro-metadata-translator`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-logging`

.. _release-v17-0-runDataRef:

Reworked Task entrypoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All ``Task``\s now provide a consistent interface to their primary functionality.
The ``Task`` provides a ``run()`` method, which takes as explicit arguments everything the task needs to get its job done.
``Task``\s may also provide a ``runDataRef()`` method, which takes a Butler “dataRef” as its argument, unpacks it, and calls ``run()``.
Command line task runners call ``runDataRef()``.
For further details, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-352`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/api-change-for-tasks-rename-run-primarymethod-to-rundataref-run/3054

.. _release-v17-0-table-fields:

Updates to output table field names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All table fields which previously had the suffix ``Sigma`` now have the suffix ``Err``.
This reflects usage in the Data Products Definition Document (DPDD; :lse:`163`).
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-333`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/sigma-renamed-to-err-for-centroids-fluxes-and-aperture-corrections/3108

Further, source catalogs have been updated to refer to fluxes with the suffix ``instFlux`` (or “instrumental flux”), rather than simply ``flux`` (which is taken to refer to a calibrated flux).
The table formerly known as ``InstFlux`` is now called ``GaussianFlux``, which more correctly represents it contents.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__, :jira:`RFC-322` and :jira:`RFC-510`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/sourcecatalog-flux-fields-are-now-instflux/3265

.. _release-v17-0-inverted:

Use ``inverted`` to  get an inverse transform
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Previously, the objects in the codebase representing coordinate transforms (e.g. `lsst.geom.LinearTransform`, `astshim.Mapping`) supported a heterogeneous mix of APIs for retrieving the inverse transform.
These have now all been standardized to use the method ``inverted()``.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-500`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/inverted-is-now-the-standard-method-name-to-get-an-inverse-transform/3122

.. _release-v17-0-calibration-flags:

Changes to calibration flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following changes were made to table field names describing sources used for calibration:

- ``calib_psfCandidate`` was renamed ``calib_psf_candidate``;
- ``calib_psfUsed`` was renamed ``calib_psf_used``;
- ``calib_astrometryUsed`` was renamed ``calib_astrometry_used``.

For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-498`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/change-in-calibration-flag-names-as-per-rfc-498/3170

.. _release-v17-0-blendedness-flags:

Changes to blendedness flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following changes were made to table field names describing source blendedness:

- ``base_Blendedness_raw_instFlux`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_raw``;
- ``base_Blendedness_abs_instFlux`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_abs``;
- ``base_Blendedness_raw_instFlux_child`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_raw_child_instFlux``;
- ``base_Blendedness_raw_instFlux_parent`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_raw_parent_instFlux``;
- ``base_Blendedness_abs_instFlux_child`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_abs_child_instFlux``;
- ``base_Blendedness_abs_instFlux_parent`` was renamed to ``base_Blendedness_abs_parent_instFlux``;
- ``deblend_psfFlux`` was renamed to ``deblend_psf_instFlux``.

For more information, refer top `this community.lsst.org post`__ and :jira:`RFC-534`.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/change-in-naming-of-base-blendedness-and-meas-deblender-fields/3351

.. _release-v17-0-task-metadata:

Task metadata is now written as YAML
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Previously, metadata was stored as a mix of YAML__ and Boost.serialization__; now, only the former is used.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://yaml.org
__ https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_69_0/libs/serialization/doc/index.html
__ https://community.lsst.org/t/task-metadata-now-written-as-yaml/3192

.. _release-v17-0-pybind11:

Changes to wrapping C++ code into Python
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

DM uses pybind11__ to expose functionality written in C++ to the Python level.
This release rethinks the way pybind11 is used, to increase robustness and reduce the size of compiled binaries.
Although it is possible to mix the old and the new techniques within the same software stack, packages must be updated to the new system atomically.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__ and the `pybind11 section in the Developer Guide`__.

__ https://pybind11.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
__ https://community.lsst.org/t/new-approach-and-tools-for-pybind11-wrappers/3291
__ https://developer.lsst.io/pybind11/how-to.html

.. _release-v17-0-astro-metadata-translator:

Changes to metadata extraction from file headers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The new `astro_metadata_translator`__ package provides a unified interface for extraction of standardized information from image file headers.
All camera support (“obs”) packages are being updated to use this new system, which will be required for the next generation of DM middleware.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://astro-metadata-translator.lsst.io
__ https://community.lsst.org/t/changes-to-metadata-extraction-and-visitinfo-creation/3360

.. _release-v17-0-logging:

Revised logging system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Log messages generated by the standard Python ``logging`` module during the execution of command-line tasks are now forwarded to the :ref:`lsst.log` system.
Furthermore, utility functions have been added to make it easy to check that the expected log messages have been generated during testing.
For more information, refer to `this community.lsst.org post`__.

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/logging-changes/3580

.. _release-v17-0-deprecations:

Pending Deprecations
--------------------

- :ref:`release-v17-0-deprecate-calib`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-deprecate-gen2`
- :ref:`release-v17-0-deprecate-lsstsim`

.. _release-v17-0-deprecate-calib:

Upcoming removal of `lsst.afw.image.Calib`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the final major release which provides the `lsst.afw.image.Calib` photometric calibration object.
Begining with 18.0, `~lsst.afw.image.Calib`, which provides only a photometric zeropoint per CCD, will be replaced with `~lsst.afw.image.PhotoCalib`, which provides a spatially-varying photometric model.
Some `~lsst.afw.image.Calib` interfaces are supported by `~lsst.afw.image.PhotoCalib`, but full API compatibility is not possible.
By the time this transition is made, `~lsst.afw.image.PhotoCalib` will be able to read files persisted with `~lsst.afw.image.Calib` objects, so backwards compatibility of on-disk data will be maintained.
For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-289` and :jira:`RFC-573`.

.. _release-v17-0-deprecate-gen2:

Upcoming removal of “Generation 2” Middleware
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The “Generation 3” middleware :ref:`included in this release <release-v17-0-gen3>` is ultimately intended to supplant the current (“Generation 2”) Data Butler and command-line task functionality.
We expect to deliver a final major release supporting the Generation 2 functionality in late calendar year 2019.
Following that release, the “Generation 2” middleware will be removed from the codebase.
This will include:

- The daf_persistence package, to be replaced by daf_butler;
- `lsst.pipe.base.CmdLineTask`, to be replaced by `lsst.pipe.base.PipelineTask`;
- The pipe_drivers and ctrl_pool packages, for which replacements are still in development.

.. _release-v17-0-deprecate-lsstSim:

Upcoming removal of the `obs_lsstSim` package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With the introduction of the new `obs_lsst` package, there is no longer a need for the `obs_lsstSim` package.
Current work should move to using `obs_lsst` as soon as possible.
Repositories using `obs_lsstSim` will need to be reprocessed using `obs_lsst`.
For the most part this transition will be transparent to end users.
The only code updates needed are in the simulations related packages.
The porting work for simulations is planned for the Summer of 2019.
We believe that `obs_lsstSim` can be archived after the release in late calendar year 2019.

.. _release-v17-0-1-patch:

17.0.1 patch release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This patch fixes an issue that affects :ref:`lsst.display.firefly` display backend users on the Notebook Aspect of the LSST Science Platform.
The viewer ID was not being set.
See :jira:`DM-18167` for additional information.
