.. _release-latest:
.. _release-v21-0-0:

###########################
Release 21.0.0 (202?-??-??)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   data-products/v21_0_0
   tickets/v21_0_0

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 21.0.0     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v21\_0\_0  |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2020_46`` weekly build.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v21_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-281) <https://ls.st/DMTR-281>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics, while :doc:`data-products/v21_0_0` covers key issues likely to impact scientists consuming Rubin data products.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-pending-deprecations`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions <../install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_master_2020_11_12_08.37.40/

.. _release-v21-0-0-functionality:

Major New Features
==================

- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-gen3`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-kht`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-fakes`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-jointcal`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-ci_cpp`

.. _release-v21-0-0-gen3:

Beta release of Generation 3 Middleware
---------------------------------------

Reaching schema stability in this release, the Gen3 butler can now support Science Pipelines development. See :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-gen2` for more information on the planned deprecation of Generation 2 middleware. Interested parties may find more info at :ref:`daf_butler <lsst.daf_butler>` and :ref:`pipe_base <lsst.pipe_base>`.
A general release of Generation 3 Middleware is expected with the next release v22.0.0.

.. _release-v21-0-0-kht:

Task to mask streak-like artifacts
----------------------------------

This release adds the `MaskStreaksTask` to :ref:`pipe_tasks <lsst.pipe_tasks>`, which finds and masks streaks and other straight lines in image data.
It uses the Kernel Hough Transform (KHT) `(Fernandes and Oliveira 2007) <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2007.04.003>`_ implemented in the `kht <https://github.com/lsst/kht>`_, package which was also added to the Science Pipelines.
It can be turned on during coaddition with `CompareWarpAssembleCoaddTask` with the config parameter `doFilterMorphological`.

.. _release-v21-0-0-fakes:

Inject arbitrary input images
------------------------------

The task to inject simulated sources into data release processing, `InsertFakesTask`, can now accept arbitrary input images.
:jirab:`DM-25747`

.. _release-v21-0-0-jointcal:

Proper motions and parallaxes applied to reference sources
----------------------------------------------------------

:ref:`jointcal <lsst.jointcal>` now can apply proper motions and parallaxes to reference sources during astrometric fitting.
:jirab:`DM-24277`

.. _release-v21-0-0-ci_cpp:

Addition of ci_cpp
------------------

The `ci_cpp` metapackage for the `ci_cpp_gen2 <https://github.com/lsst/ci_cpp_gen2>`_ and `ci_cpp_gen3 <https://github.com/lsst/ci_cpp_gen3>`_ packages provides continuous integration tests for calibration production code. This supplements unit tests in `cp_pipe <https://github.com/lsst/cp_pipe>`_ as it can do more computationally expensive tests.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-718`.



.. _release-v21-0-0-interface:

Significant Interface Changes
=============================

- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-sdm_schemas`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-ctrl_bps`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-pipelines_check`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-remove-synpipe`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-remove-obs_sdss`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-remove-pex_policy`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-modernization-afw`

.. _release-v21-0-0-sdm_schemas:

Rename the cat package to sdm_schemas
-------------------------------------

The package `cat` was renamed to `sdm_schemas <https://github.com/lsst/sdm_schemas>`_, which contains database schemas for output tables.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-672`.

.. _release-v21-0-0-ctrl_bps:

Addition of the ctrl_bps package
--------------------------------

The `ctrl_bps <lsst.ctrl_bps>`_ package provides a PipelineTask execution framework for multi-node processing for the LSST Batch Production Service (BPS).

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-736`.

.. _release-v21-0-0-pipelines_check:

Addition of pipelines_check package
-----------------------------------

The new :ref:`pipelines_check <lsst.pipelines_check>` package replaces `lsst_dm_stack_demo`, which relied on the now :ref:`release-v21-0-0-remove-obs_sdss<removed obs_sdss>`. This new package demonstrates the processing of a single CCD with the Science Pipelines. It contains input files and astrometric reference catalogs needed to process the data from a single HSC detector. Its main purpose is to check that the pipeline infrastructure is working correctly.

.. _release-v21-0-0-remove-obs_sdss:

Removal of the obs_sdss package
-------------------------------

The obs_sdss camera package has been removed from the Science Pipelines before the release of version 21.0.0.
Note that this package was previously slated for removal before the release of version 20.0.0, but this has been delayed.
The lsst_dm_stack_demo package, which makes use of obs_sdss was replaced with a package providing similar functionality, :ref:`release-v21-0-0-pipelines_check`.
:jirab:`RFC-645, DM-22578`.

.. _release-v21-0-0-remove-synpipe:

Removal of the Synpipe package
------------------------------

The Synpipe package is no longer included as part of the Science Pipelines.
Tasks for inserting simulated sources are now available as part of :ref:`pipe_tasks <lsst.pipe.tasks>`; see `community.lsst.org`__ for details.
:jirab:`RFC-661, DM-23344`

__ https://community.lsst.org/t/new-tasks-for-fake-source-insertion/3722

.. _release-v21-0-0-remove-pex_policy:

Removal of the pex_policy package
---------------------------------

The obsolete pex_policy package has been removed from the Science Pipelines before the release of version 21.0.0.
Note that this package was previously slated for removal before the release of version 20.0.0, but this has been delayed.
Calls to `lsst.pex.policy.makePolicy` should be modernized to become calls to `lsst.pex.config.makePropertySet`.
:jirab:`RFC-626, DM-23374`

.. _release-v21-0-0-modernization-afw:

Modernization of the C++ API in `lsst.afw`
------------------------------------------

As announced in v20.0, a number of deprecated C++ APIs in `lsst.afw`
have been removed. Third-party calls to most of these APIs will simply
fail to compile. However, calls to
:cpp:function:`~lsst::afw::math::convolve` that previously passed
individual `bool` values for their final argument(s) instead of using
`~lsst.afw.math.ConvolutionControl` may inadvertently call the version
with `~lsst.afw.math.ConvolutionControl`, leading to subtle bugs or
segmentation faults.
:jirab:`RFC-687, DM-17566, DM-22814, DM-23076, DM-24565`

.. _release-v21-0-0-pending-deprecations:

Pending Deprecations
====================

These packages/functions will be deprecated in the next major release.

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-gen2:

Removal of “Generation 2” Middleware
------------------------------------

The “Generation 3” middleware :ref:`first included in the 17.0.0 release <release-v17-0-gen3>` is ultimately intended to supplant the current (“Generation 2”) Data Butler and command-line task functionality.
When the new middleware is stable and has reached feature parity with the old code, deprecation of the Generation 2 system will be announced.
At that time, guidance for transitioning to the new system will be made available.
This will include moving migrating from `lsst.daf.persistence` to `lsst.daf.butler`, and `lsst.pipe.base.CmdLineTask` will be replaced by `lsst.pipe.base.PipelineTask`.
Progress towards the deprecation of Generation 2 may be tracked on :jira:`DM-20572`.

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

These packages/functions are deprecated and will not be available in the next major release.

- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-obs_ctio0m9`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-gen2tasks_MetricTask`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-isrTask.py`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-metric-in-commonMetrics.py`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-doApplyUberCal-in-forcedPhotCcd.py`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-fgcmFitCycle.py`
- :ref:`release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py`

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-obs_ctio0m9:

Removal of the obs_ctio0m9 package
----------------------------------

The obs_ctio0m9 camera package will be removed from the Science Pipelines before the release of version 22.0.0.
:jirab:`RFC-729, DM-26867, DM-26868`

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-gen2tasks_MetricTask:

Removal of MetricTask
---------------------

The :code:`MetricTask` is replaced by `lsst.verify.tasks.MetricTask`.
It will be removed along with daf_persistence before the next release 22.0.0.
:jirab:`DM-21910`

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-isrTask.py:

Deprecated configurations in isrTask.py
---------------------------------------

The following configurations will be removed before the 22.0.0 release:

* overscanFitType
* overscanOrder
* overscanNumSigmaClip
* overscanIsInt

Please configure overscan via the :code:`OverscanCorrectionConfig` interface.

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-metric-in-commonMetrics.py:

Deprecated metric configurations in commonMetric.py
---------------------------------------------------

The :code:`metric` field has been replaced by :code:`connections.package` and
:code:`connections.metric`. It will be removed along with daf_persistence.

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-doApplyUberCal-in-forcedPhotCcd.py:

Deprecated doApplyUberCal in forcedPhotCcd.py
---------------------------------------------

The field :code:`doApplyUberCal` is deprecated.
Use :code:`doApplyExternalPhotoCalib` and code:`doApplyExternalSkyWcs` instead.
It will be removed before the 22.0.0 release.
:jirab:`DM-23352`

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-fgcmFitCycle.py:

Deprecated configurations in fgcmFitCycle.py
--------------------------------------------

The following configurations are no longer used and will be removed before the 22.0.0 release:

* fitFlag
* requiredFlag
* superStarSubCcd
* ccdGraySubCcd
* expGrayPhotometricCut
* expGrayHighCut
* expVarGrayPhotometricCut
* aperCorrInputSlopes
* sedFudgeFactors, use sedSlopeMap instead
* sigFgcmMaxEGray, use sigFgcmMaxEGrayDict instead
* approxThroughput, use approxThroughputDict instead
* colorSplitIndices, use colorSplitBands instead
* useRepeatabilityForExpGrayCuts, use useRepeatabilityForExpGrayCutsDict instead

:jirab:`DM-23699`

.. _release-v21-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py:

Deprecated configurations in psfexStarSelector.py
-------------------------------------------------

The following configurations are no longer used and will be removed before the 22.0.0 release:

* maxbad
* maxbadflag
