.. _release-v24-0-0:

###########################
Release 24.0.0 (2022-12-09)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v24_0_0

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 24.0.0     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v24\_0\_0  |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                         | 4.0.5      |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+


This release is based on the ``w_2022_28`` weekly build with 13 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v24_0_0`.

A Characterization Metric Report will be released describing the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics with the first minor release.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-pending-deprecations`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_main_2022_07_07_08.22.14/


.. _release-v24-0-0-functionality:

Major New Features
==================

- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-gen3`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-scarlet-lite`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-piff`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-repeatable-stars`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-amp-matching`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-python310`


.. _release-v24-0-0-gen3:

Generation 3 Middleware
-----------------------

This has now formally replaced the Generation 2 middleware.
Some highlights of this release:

* We have changed the multi-snap visit definition to match operations at the observatory.
* New butler commands ``remove-runs`` and ``remove-collections`` have been added. These should be used instead of (now deprecated) ``prune-collections``, which can remove more than people expect when chained collections are pruned.
* It is now possible for the Python type associated with a dataset type to not match that of the butler registry if a converter function has been registered.
* The command-line tools now only set the logging level of ``lsst`` loggers by default rather than modifying the root logger.
* Graph building now includes additional diagnostics when an empty quantum graph is reported.
* New ``pipetask`` commands ``purge`` and ``cleanup`` have been added.
* A simple pipeline execution class has been added to make it easier to run pipelines in unit tests.
* The ``bps`` command now includes ``restart`` and ``ping`` functionality.

For more information, see detailed notes on changes to the following middleware packages on this release:

- :doc:`lsst.daf.butler </modules/lsst.daf.butler/CHANGES>`,
- :doc:`lsst.pipe.base </modules/lsst.pipe.base/CHANGES>`,
- :doc:`lsst.ctrl.mpexec </modules/lsst.ctrl.mpexec/CHANGES>`,
- :doc:`lsst.ctrl.bps </modules/lsst.ctrl.bps/CHANGES>`.

.. _release-v24-0-0-scarlet-lite:

Scarlet Lite
------------

Scarlet Lite is now used by default for measurements on coadds. It is algorithmically identical to Scarlet when processing data from a single camera and takes advantage of analytic gradients to improve runtime and memory usage.
Change the configuration parameter ``version`` in :py:class:`~lsst.meas.extensions.scarlet.ScarletDeblendTask` to switch.

See :ref:`lsst.meas.extensions.scarlet` for more info.

.. _release-v24-0-0-piff:

PIFF Default for PSF Modeling
-----------------------------
The data release pipeline now uses `Piff <https://github.com/rmjarvis/Piff>`_ as the default PSF modeling algorithm.
PSFex and PcaPsf are still available per optional configuration.
:jirab:`RFC-755`

.. _release-v24-0-0-repeatable-stars:

Repeatable Star Selection for PSF Modeling
------------------------------------------

The default data release production pipeline now includes Tasks :lsst-task:`~lsst.pipe.tasks.isolatedStarAssociation.IsolatedStarAssociationTask` and :lsst-task:`~lsst.pipe.tasks.finalizeCharacterization.FinalizeCharacterizationTask`, which combine multiple visits to identify a consistent set of isolated stars to use for PSF modeling in ever visit.

.. _release-v24-0-0-amp-matching:

Amp-to-amp Offset Matching During ISR
-------------------------------------

The `~lsst.ip.isr.IsrTask` includes the Pan-STARRS “pattern continuity” algorithm (a.k.a amp-to-amp matching) that applies additive offsets to the background levels of individual amplifiers so that the boundaries are continuous.

.. _release-v24-0-0-python310:

Use Python 3.10
---------------

As approved in :jirab:`RFC-845`, the Science Pipelines uses 3.10 as the baseline python version.


.. _release-v24-0-0-interface:

Significant Interface Changes
=============================

- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-new-packages`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-packages-removed`

.. _release-v24-0-0-new-packages:

New Packages Added
------------------
* `analysis_drp <https://github.com/lsst/analysis_drp>`_ provides static plotting code for monitoriing pipeline quality.
* `atmospec <https://github.com/lsst/atmospec>`_ and `spectractor <https://github.com/lsst/spectractor>`_ provide support for analyzing spetra from LATISS.
* `lsst\_bps\_plugins <https://github.com/lsst/lsst_bps_plugins>`_, :ref:`lsst.ctrl.bps.htcondor`, and  :ref:`lsst.ctrl.bps.panda`
* :ref:`lsst.drp.pipe` provide high-level pipeline specification for data releases.
* resources

.. _release-v24-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages Removed
--------------------
* `validate_drp <https://github.com/lsst/validate_drp>`_, `validate_data_cfht <https://github.com/lsst/validate_data_cfht>`_, `validate_data_decam <https://github.com/lsst/validate_data_decam>`_ were removed. The algorithms implemented in `validate_drp <https://github.com/lsst/validate_drp>`_ were ported as-is to run in :ref:`lsst.faro`. All future development of scientific performance metrics will be carried out in faro.
* A number of packages that were gen2-specific, `obs_test <https://github.com/lsst-dm/legacy-obs_test>`_, `obs_test_data <https://github.com/lsst/obs_test_data>`_, `ctrl_orca <https://github.com/lsst-dm/legacy-ctrl_orca>`_,  `ctrl_execute <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_execute>`_, `ctrl_platform_lsstvc <https://github.com/lsst-dm/legacy-ctrl_platform_lsstvc>`_, were also removed.

.. _release-v24-0-0-pending-deprecations:

Pending Deprecations
====================

These Tasks or methods will be deprecated in the next major release.

- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-gen3-code`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-shared-pointers`

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-gen3-code:


Deprecated Gen 3 code in pipe_drivers
-------------------------------------

The ``PipelineTask`` classes in ``pipe_drivers``, ``FocalPlaneBackground`` and ``SkyCorrectionTask``, should no longer be used and the identical code in ``pipe_tasks`` should be used instead.
Please update any Gen3 pipeline definitions to use the new location.
``pipe_drivers`` (along with ``ctrl_pool`` and ``daf_persistence``) will be removed following the release of v25.0.0.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-shared-pointers:

Discourage shared_ptr arguments for C++ member functions
--------------------------------------------------------
Smart pointers (such as ``shared_ptr``) should only be used as arguments if a reference, const reference, or raw pointer cannot be used. In ``afw`` and ``daf_base`` some member functions were overloaded and the old implementations using ``shared_ptr`` were marked deprecated and will be removed following the release of v25.0.0.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-817`.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

These packages/functions are deprecated and will not be available in the next major release.

- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-gen2`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-decamRawIngestTask`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-doApplyUberCal-in-forcedPhotCcd.py`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-default-position`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-logging`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-supported-datasets`
- :ref:`release-v24-0-0-deprecate-configurations`

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-gen2:

Deprecated Generation 2 Middleware
----------------------------------

Generation 2 middleware (Gen2) is no longer being developed and should not be used for new code.
Gen2 infrastructure code (within e.g., :ref:`lsst.pipe.tasks`, :ref:`lsst.pipe.base`, :ref:`lsst.obs.base`, `lsst.daf.persistence <https://github.com:lsst/daf_persistence>`_, and obs packages) will be removed for the next release.

Following this release, we will remove Gen2 infrastructure code and the command-line task entry points, ``runDataRef``, to the Tasks.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-decamRawIngestTask:

Deprecated DecamRawIngestTask
-----------------------------

DECam no longer requires a specialist Gen3 ingest task.
Please use the default `~lsst.obs.base.RawIngestTask`.
`~lsst.obs.decam.ingest.DecamRawIngestTask` will be removed after v24.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-doApplyUberCal-in-forcedPhotCcd.py:

Deprecated doApplyUberCal in ForcedPhotCcdTask
----------------------------------------------

The field ``doApplyUberCal`` is deprecated.
Use ``doApplyExternalPhotoCalib`` and ``doApplyExternalSkyWcs`` instead.
It will be removed after this release.
:jirab:`DM-23352`


.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py:

Deprecated configurations in PsfexStarSelectorTask
--------------------------------------------------

The following configurations are no longer used and will be removed after this release:

* ``maxbad``
* ``maxbadflag``

:jirab:`DM-5684`

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-default-position:

Deprecate PSF evaluation without position argument
--------------------------------------------------

PSF models are spatially-varying. Evaluation of these models with methods such as ``psf.computeImage()`` without a position argument will return the realization of the PSF at the average position. A position argument will be required after v24. The current behavior can be replicated by explicitly providing the average position like ``psf.computeImage(psf.getAveragePosition())``.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-796`.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-logging:

Deprecate f-string log messages
-------------------------------

f-string log messages are now deprecated to match Python logging convention.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-789`.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-supported-datasets:

Deprecate ap.verify.Dataset.getSupportedDatasets
------------------------------------------------

The concept of 'supported' datasets is deprecated.
The ``getSupportedDatasets`` method will be removed after v24.

.. _release-v24-0-0-deprecate-configurations:

Deprecated Task Configurations
------------------------------

The following configurations are no longer used and will be removed after the 24.0.0 release:

In :lsst-task:`~lsst.pipe.tasks.selectImages.PsfWcsSelectImagesTask`, the following configuration parameters and functionality have been moved to :lsst-task:`~lsst.pipe.tasks.computeExposureSummaryStats.ComputeExposureSummaryStatsTask`:

* ``starSelection``
* ``starShape``
* ``psfShape``

The configuration parameter ``doLegacyStarSelectionComputation`` has been added to provide backwards compatibility for the duration of two releases.

In ``lsst.pipe.tasks.InsertFakesTask``:

* ``raColName``: Use ``ra_col`` instead.
* ``decColName``: Use ``dec_col`` instead.
* ``diskHLR``, ``aDisk``, ``bDisk``, ``paDisk``: Use ``disk_semimajor_col``, ``disk_axis_ratio_col``, and ``disk_pa_col`` to specify disk half-light ellipse.
* ``nDisk``: Use ``disk_n`` instead.
* ``bulgeHLR``, ``bulge_pa_col``, ``aBulge``, ``bBulge``, ``paBulge``: Use ``bulge_semimajor_col``, ``bulge_axis_ratio_col``, and  to specify disk half-light ellipse.
* ``nBulge``: Use ``bulge_n`` instead.
* ``magVar``: Use ``mag_col`` instead.
* ``sourceSelectionColName``: Use ``select_col`` instead.
