.. _release-v25-0-0

###########################
Release 25.0.2 (2023-11-17)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v25_0_0

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 25.0.2     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v25\_0\_2  |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                         | 5.0.1      |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2022_48`` weekly build with 27 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v25_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-302) <https://dmtr-392.lsst.io/>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `Community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-pending-deprecations`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_main_2022_11_24_08.00.57/

.. _release-v25-0-0-functionality:

Major new features
==================

- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-analysis-tools`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-gbdes`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-parsl-plugin`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-hips`

.. _release-v25-0-0-analysis-tools:

Analysis tools
--------------

The new package, :ref:`analysis_tools <lsst.analysis.tools>`, implements a framework for modular, scalable, and reproducible computation of metrics and plots to assess both image and pipeline quality.

.. _release-v25-0-0-gbdes:

GBDES
-----

A significantly modified fork of Dark Energy Survey's astrometric calibration algorithm has been added to the Science Pipelines.
`gbdes <https://github.com/lsst/gbdes>`_ will be used for global astrometric fitting in the data release pipeline from v26.0.0.
See also :jira:`RFC-853`.

.. _release-v25-0-0-parsl-plugin:

BPS Parsl plugin
----------------

A Parsl-based plugin `ctrl_bps_parsl <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_bps_parsl>`_ for the LSST Batch Production Service (BPS) execution framework as added.
It is intended to support running LSST PipelineTask jobs on high-performance computing (HPC) clusters.

.. _release-v25-0-0-hips:

Hierarchical Progressive Surveys (HiPS) trees
---------------------------------------------

`~lsst.pipe.tasks.hips.GenerateHipsTask` was added to the pipelines.
This Task generates Hierarchical Progressive Surveys (HiPS) trees from high-resolution, healpix-projected coadds. HiPS images produced by this Task are viewable in the Portal for `Data Preview 0.2 <https://dp0-2.lsst.io/>`_.

.. _release-v25-0-0-interface:

Significant interface changes
=============================

- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-new-diffim`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-scarlet-storage`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-new-packages`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-packages-removed`

.. _release-v25-0-0-new-diffim:

Refactored image difference tasks
---------------------------------

`~lsst.pipe.tasks.ImageDifferenceTask`, which performed both image subtraction and source detection, has been split into `~lsst.ip.diffim.AlardLuptonSubtractTask` and `~lsst.ip.diffim.DetectAndMeasureTask`. The first performs image subtraction, and the latter detects and measures sources on the image differences.

.. _release-v25-0-0-scarlet-storage:

Scarlet outputs
---------------

`lsst.meas.extensions.ScarletDeblendTask` now outputs a single storage container that allows users to access both the scarlet models and flux re-distributed model while using an order of magnitude less storage space.

.. _release-v25-0-0-new-packages:

New packages added
------------------

* `analysis_tools <https://github.com/lsst/analysis_tools>`_ assists in the creation of quality assurance (QA) plots and metrics from the outputs of a data reduction pipeline
* `ctrl_bps_parsl <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_bps_parsl>`_ is the Parsl-based plugin for the LSST Batch Production Service (BPS) execution framework.
* `display_astrowidgets <https://github.com/lsst/display_astrowidgets>`_ is the astrowidgets implementation for afwDisplay based on the Ginga image viewer
* `drp_tasks <https://github.com/lsst/drp_tasks>`_ contains high-level Tasks specific to the data release production pipeline.
* `felis <https://github.com/lsst/felis>`_ contains DBMS-agnostic schema descriptions
* `gbdes <https://github.com/lsst/gbdes>`_ is a fork of the gbernstein/gbdes package, modified for use by the LSST Science Pipelines as a third-party dependency.

.. _release-v25-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages removed
----------------

* `Eigen <https://github.com/lsst/eigen>`_, replaced by the conda version.
* `ap_pipe_testdata <https://github.com/lsst/ap_pipe_testdata>`_, obsolete Gen 2 test data.

.. _release-v25-0-0-pending-deprecations:

Pending deprecations
====================

These Tasks or methods will be deprecated in the next major release.

- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-obs-base`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-pipe-tasks`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-ip-diffim`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-afw-table`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-daf-butler`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecate-configurations`

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-obs-base:

Deprecate method getInstrument
------------------------------

``obs.base.util.getInstrument`` will be replaced by ``lsst.pipe.base.Instrument.from_string`` and will be removed after release of release v27.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-pipe-tasks:

Deprecate interfaces ParquetTable and MultilevelParquetTable
------------------------------------------------------------

The Gen 2 I/O interfaces ``ParquetTable`` and ``MultilevelParquetTable`` in ``pipe_tasks`` will be removed after the release of v26.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-ip-diffim:

Deprecate factory construction with makeIdFactory
-------------------------------------------------

ID factory construction with ``lsst.ip.diffim.detectAndMeasure.makeIdFactory`` should be replaced by using ``idGenerator`` config field and will be removed after the release of v27.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-afw-table:

Deprecate method get_bool_array
-------------------------------

The ``get_bool_array`` method in ``lsst.afw.table.BaseColumnView`` and its derived subclasses should not be used as ``Catalog.__getitem__`` now provides better support accessing flag/bool columns and will be removed after the release of v27.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-daf-butler:

Pending deprecations in lsst.daf.butler
---------------------------------------

The methods ``Butler.put``, ``Butler.get`` and ``Butler.getDeferred`` have been updated and should now replace calls to ``Butler.putDirect``, ``Butler.getDirect`` and ``Butler.getDeferred``, which are being removed.
``Butler.datasetExistsDirect`` will be replaced by ``Butler.stored``. ``Butler.datasetExists`` will be replaced by ``Butler.exists``.
The ``Butler.datastore`` property will be deprecated.
The ``DimensionPacker`` class will be deprecated in v26.0.0 in favor of configurable dimension packers.
Before mentioned will be removed after the release of v27.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-skymap-packers:

Deprecate SkyMapDimensionPacker
-------------------------------

In ``lsst.skymap.packers.SkyMapDimensionPacker`` the methods ``getIntFromFilter``, ``getFilterNameFromInt`` and ``getMaxIntForFilters`` will be deprecated in v26.0.0 and be removed after the release of v27.0.0.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecate-configurations:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

Configurations in  ``lsst.pipe.tasks.skyCorrectionu`` that will be removed after the release of v26.0.0. (see :jirab:`RFC-898` for further details):

* ``bgModel`` : Use ``bgModel1`` instead
* ``doBgModel``
* ``doBgModel1``

The field ``doPsfMatch`` in ``lsst.pipe.tasks.coaddBase`` is no longer used and will be released after the release of v27.0.0.

In ``lsst.cp,pipe.ptc.cpExtractPtcTask`` the following configurations have been moved to ``cpSolvePtcTask`` and will be removed after the release of v26.0.0:

* ``minMeanSignal``
* ``maxMeanSignal``


.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

These packages/functions are deprecated and will not be available in the next major release.

- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-image-difference-task`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-gen3-code`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-shared-pointers`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-default-position`
- :ref:`release-v25-0-0-deprecated-logging`

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-image-difference-task:

Deprecated ImageDifferenceTask
------------------------------

`~lsst.pipe.tasks.ImageDifferenceTask` has been deprecated and will be removed after this release. It has been superseded by `~lsst.ip.diffim.AlardLuptonSubtractTask` and `~lsst.ip.diffim.DetectAndMeasureTask`.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-gen3-code:

Deprecated Gen 3 code in pipe_drivers
-------------------------------------

The ``PipelineTask`` classes in ``pipe_drivers``, ``FocalPlaneBackground`` and ``SkyCorrectionTask``, are deprecated and the identical code in ``pipe_tasks`` should be used instead.
Please update any Gen 3 pipeline definitions to use the new location.
``pipe_drivers`` (along with ``ctrl_pool`` and ``daf_persistence``) will be removed following this release.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-shared-pointers:

Deprecated shared_ptr arguments for C++ member functions
--------------------------------------------------------

Smart pointers (such as ``shared_ptr``) should only be used as arguments if a reference, const reference, or raw pointer cannot be used. In ``afw`` and ``daf_base`` some member functions were overloaded and the old implementations using ``shared_ptr`` were marked deprecated and will be removed following this release.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-817`.

The field ``doApplyUberCal`` is deprecated.
Use ``doApplyExternalPhotoCalib`` and ``doApplyExternalSkyWcs`` instead.
It will be removed after this release.
:jirab:`DM-23352`

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-configurations-in-psfexStarSelector.py:

Deprecated configurations in PsfexStarSelectorTask
--------------------------------------------------
The following configurations are no longer used and will be removed after this release:

* ``maxbad``
* ``maxbadflag``

:jirab:`DM-5684`

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-default-position:

Deprecate PSF evaluation without position argument
--------------------------------------------------

PSF models are spatially-varying. Evaluation of these models with methods such as ``psf.computeImage`` without a position argument will return the realization of the PSF at the average position.
A position argument will be required after v25.
The current behavior can be replicated by explicitly providing the average position like ``psf.computeImage(psf.getAveragePosition)``.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-796`.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-logging:

Deprecated f-string log messages
--------------------------------

f-string log messages are now deprecated to match Python logging convention.

For more information, refer to :jira:`RFC-789`.

.. _release-v25-0-0-deprecated-supported-datasets:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

In ``lsst.pipe.tasks.InsertFakesTask``:

* ``raColName``: Use ``ra_col`` instead.
* ``decColName``: Use ``dec_col`` instead.
* ``diskHLR``, ``aDisk``, ``bDisk``, ``paDisk``: Use ``disk_semimajor_col``, ``disk_axis_ratio_col``, and ``disk_pa_col`` to specify disk half-light ellipse.
* ``nDisk``: Use ``disk_n`` instead.
* ``bulgeHLR``, ``bulge_pa_col``, ``aBulge``, ``bBulge``, ``paBulge``: Use ``bulge_semimajor_col``, ``bulge_axis_ratio_col``, and  to specify disk half-light ellipse.
* ``nBulge``: Use ``bulge_n`` instead.
* ``magVar``: Use ``mag_col`` instead.
* ``sourceSelectionColName``: Use ``select_col`` instead.
