.. _release-v26-0-0:

###########################
Release 26.0.2 (2024-03-20)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v26_0_0

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 26.0.2     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v26\_0\_2  |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                         | 7.0.1      |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2023_32`` weekly build with 18 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v26_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-421) <https://dmtr-421.lsst.io>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `Community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_v26.0.0_2023_12_14_04.16.55/

.. _release-v26-0-0-functionality:

Major new features
==================

- :ref:`release-v26.0.0-mkl`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-skyCoordinates`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-gbdes`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-transiNet`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-butler-overhaul`
- :ref:`release-v26.0.0-latiss-crosstalk`


.. _release-v26.0.0-mkl:

Intel Math Kernel Library compatibility
---------------------------------------

The codebase is now compatible with the Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL).
``rubin-env 7.0.1`` provides now ``BLAS`` from ``MKL`` by default.

.. _release-v26-0-0-skyCoordinates:

Fitting PIFF PSFs in sky coordinates
------------------------------------

The default PSF model, PIFF (PSFs in the Full FOV), can now fit PSFs in sky coordinates, which is especially important if the detectors see small-scale WCS distortions (for example, DES's treerings).

.. _release-v26-0-0-gbdes:

Fitting parallax and proper motion with GBDES
---------------------------------------------

A significantly modified fork of Dark Energy Survey's astrometric calibration `gbdes <https://github.com/lsst/gbdes>`_ is now used by default for global astrometric fitting in the data release pipeline.
This algorithm configurably fits stellar proper motion and parallax while fitting positions. See also :jira:`RFC-853`.

.. _release-v26-0-0-transiNet:

New package meas_transiNet
--------------------------

A ``PipelineTask`` interface, `~lsst.meas.transiNet`, for the deep learning-based transient detection package, `TransiNet <https://github.com/NimSed/TransiNet0>`_, was added to the build. These Tasks provide real-bogus classifications of `DIASources`.

.. _release-v26.0.0-latiss-crosstalk:

Crosstalk-correction enabled for LATISS
---------------------------------------

Crosstalk-correction is now enabled for LATISS on Auxtel.

.. _release-v26-0-0-butler-overhaul:

Data Butler Query System Improvements
-------------------------------------

The data butler's query system has undergone a major overhaul.
These improvements provide better graph pipeline execution (less manual intervention for pipeline operators and more fine-grained control for commissioning).
They also set the stage for the future ''client/server butler'', which will use http APIs instead of database connections to scale up and add access control for science users.

.. _release-v26-0-0-interface:

Significant interface changes
=============================

.. _release-v26-0-0-new-packages:

New packages added
------------------

* `meas_transiNet <https://github.com/lsst/meas_transiNet>`_ provides a ``PipelineTask`` interface for the ``TransiNet`` machine learning classification package.
* `ctrl_execute <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_execute>`_ for configuration writing and orchestration execution. It was removed in v24.0.0 and added back in this release.
* `ctrl_platform_s3df <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_platform_s3df>`_ provides S3DF-specific templates used to write configuration files.
* `daf_relation <https://github.com/lsst/daf_relation>`_ provides classes that represent relational algebra expression trees, along with algorithms to convert them to SQLAlchemy objects and Python generators.

.. _release-v26-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages removed
----------------

* `ctrl_pool <https://github.com/lsst/ctrl_pool>`_,
* `daf_persistence <https://github.com/lsst/daf_persistence>`_ and
* `pipe_drivers <https://github.com/lsst/pipe_drivers>`_ are obsolete Gen2 middleware removed after the deprecation period.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

These tasks or methods are now deprecated and will be removed in the next major release.
See :jira:`RFC-945` for a clarification on the accelerated deprecation policy.

- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-ip-diffim`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-afw`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-daf-butler`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-skymap-packers`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-obs-base`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-pipe-base`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-rfc-901`
- :ref:`release-v26-0-0-deprecated-configurations`

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks:

Deprecations in lsst.pipe.tasks
-------------------------------

`~lsst.pipe.tasks.assembleCoadd.AssembleCoaddTask.makeSupplementaryDataGen3` in `~lsst.pipe.tasks.assembleCoadd.AssembleCoaddTask` is deprecated in favor of `~lsst.pipe.tasks.assembleCoadd.AssembleCoaddTask._makeSupplementaryData`.

The Gen 2 I/O interfaces `~lsst.pipe.tasks.parquetTable.ParquetTable` and `~lsst.pipe.tasks.parquetTable.MultilevelParquetTable` are deprecated.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-ip-diffim:

Deprecated ID factory construction with makeIdFactory
-----------------------------------------------------

ID factory construction `~lsst.ip.diffim.detectAndMeasure.DetectAndMeasureTask.makeIdFactory` now depends on configuration and should be specified with the `idGenerator` Config field.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-afw:

Deprecations in lsst.afw
-------------------------

The `~lsst.afw.table.BaseColumnView.get_bool_array` method in `~lsst.afw.table.BaseColumnView` and its derived subclasses should not be used and will be removed.
`Catalog.__getitem__` now provides better support accessing flag/bool columns.

In the class `lsst.afw.image.MaskedImage` the method `getArray` will be removed in favor the individual properties.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-daf-butler:

Deprecations in lsst.daf.butler
-------------------------------

In the classes `~lsst.daf.butler.Butler`, `~lsst.daf.butler.LimitedButler` and `~lsst.daf.butler.QuantumBackedButler` these methods are deprecated:

* ``putDirect``: Use ``put`` instead
* ``getDirect``, Use ``get`` instead
* ``getDirectDeferred``, Use ``getDeferred`` instead
* ``datasetExistsDirect``: Use ``datasetExistsDirect`` instead
* ``datastore``, removed without replacement as the ``datastore`` property is now deprecated

``CollectionSearch`` is deprecated in favor of tuples of string collection names.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-skymap-packers:

Deprecation in SkyMapDimensionPacker
------------------------------------

In `lsst.skymap.packers.SkyMapDimensionPacker`, the methods `~lsst.skymap.packers.SkyMapDimensionPacker.getIntFromFilter`, `~lsst.skymap.packers.SkyMapDimensionPacker.getFilterNameFromInt` and `~lsst.skymap.packers.SkyMapDimensionPacker.getMaxIntForFilters` are deprecated.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-obs-base:

Deprecations in `lsst.obs.base`
-------------------------------

The class `~lsst.obs.base.ExposureIdInfo` is deprecated in favor of `~lsst.meas.base.IdGenerator`.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-pipe-base:

Deprecations in `lsst.pipe.base`
--------------------------------

The class `~lsst.pipe.base.ButlerQuantumContext` has been renamed to `~lsst.pipe.base.QuantumContext` and given extra functionality.

The class `~lsst.pipe.base._observation_dimension_packer.ObservationDimensionPacker` is deprecated in favor of configurable dimension packers.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-rfc-901:

Deprecation of input calibration Task Connections and Configurations for visitSummary
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A number of connections and configurations controlling the application of global photometric and astrometric solutions and PSF models were deprecated. These connections will be replaced ``visitSummary``. See :jira:`RFC-901`.

In `~lsst.pipe.tasks.coaddBase.CoaddBaseTask` (`~lsst.pipe.tasks.makeWarp.MakeWarpTask`, `~lsst.pipe.tasks.assembleCoadd.AssembleCoaddTask` and children), `~lsst.pipe.tasks.postprocess.WriteRecalibratedSourceTableTask`, `~lsst.faro.measurement.DetectorMeasurementTask`, `~lsst.faro.base.MatchedBaseTask`, `~lsst.meas.base.ForcedPhotCcdTask`, `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonSubtractTask`, `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonPreconvolveSubtractTask` the following configuration parameters were deprecated.

* ``doApplyExternalSkyWcs``
* ``useGlobalExternalSkyWcs``
* ``doApplyExternalPhotoCalib``
* ``useGlobalExternalPhotoCalib``
* ``doApplyFinalizedPsf`` (to be removed in  `~lsst.meas.base.ForcedPhotCcdTask`, and replaced by ``useVisitSummaryPsf`` in `~lsst.pipe.tasks.makeWarp.MakeWarpTask`, and replaced by ``doApplyExternalCalibrations``  `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonSubtractTask`, and `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonPreconvolveSubtractTask`)

In `~lsst.pipe.tasks.postprocess.WriteObjectTableTask`, the configuration parameter ``engine`` was deprecated.

In `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonSubtractTask` and `~lsst.ip.diffim.subtractImages.AlardLuptonPreconvolveSubtractTask` the connection ``finalizedPsfApCorrCatalog`` was deprecated.

In `~lsst.meas.base.forcedPhotCcd.ForcedPhotCcdTask` and `~lsst.meas.base.forcedPhotCcd.ForcedPhotCcdFromDataFrameTask`, `~lsst.pipe.tasks.makeWarp.MakeWarpTask` `~lsst.faro.base.MatchedBaseTask`,  `~lsst.faro.measurement.DetectorMeasurementTask`, `~lsst.pipe.tasks.postprocess.WriteRecalibratedSourceTableTask` the following connections were deprecated:

* ``externalSkyWcsTractCatalog``
* ``externalSkyWcsGlobalCatalog``
* ``externalPhotoCalibTractCatalog``
* ``externalPhotoCalibGlobalCatalog``

* In `~lsst.meas.base.forcedPhotCcd.ForcedPhotCcdTask` and `~lsst.meas.base.forcedPhotCcd.ForcedPhotCcdFromDataFrameTask` `~lsst.pipe.tasks.makeWarp.MakeWarpTask` the connection ``finalizedPsfApCorrCatalog`` was also deprecated.
* In  `~lsst.pipe.tasks.makeWarp.MakeWarpTask` the connections ``wcsList`` and ``bboxList`` were also deprecated.
* In `~lsst.faro.base.MatchedBaseTask` the connections ``photoCalibs``, ``astromCalibs`` were also deprecated.
* In `~lsst.faro.measurement.DetectorMeasurementTask` the connections ``skyWcs``, ``photoCalib`` were also deprecated.
* In `~lsst.pipe.tasks.postprocess.WriteRecalibratedSourceTableTask` the connections ``skyMap``, ``exposure`` were also deprecated, and the methods ``attachCalibs`` and ``getClosestTract`` will be removed.

.. _release-v26-0-0-deprecated-configurations:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

Configurations in `~lsst.pipe.tasks.skyCorrection.SkyCorrectionTask` that will be removed (see :jirab:`RFC-898` for further details):

* ``bgModel``: Use ``bgModel1`` instead
* ``doBgModel``
* ``doBgModel1``

The ``doPsfMatch`` in `~lsst.pipe.tasks.coaddBase.CoaddBaseTask` is no longer used.

In `lsst.cp.pipe.ptc.cpExtractPtcTask` the following configurations have been moved to ``cpSolvePtcTask`` and will be removed:

* ``minMeanSignal``
* ``maxMeanSignal``

In `~lsst.pipe.tasks.insertFakes.InsertFakesTask`:

* ``raColName``: Use ``ra_col`` instead
* ``decColName``: Use ``dec_col`` instead
* ``diskHLR``, ``aDisk``, ``bDisk``, ``paDisk``: Use ``disk_semimajor_col``, ``disk_axis_ratio_col``, and ``disk_pa_col`` to specify disk half-light ellipse
* ``nDisk``: Use ``disk_n`` instead.
* ``bulgeHLR``, ``bulge_pa_col``, ``aBulge``, ``bBulge``, ``paBulge``: Use ``bulge_semimajor_col``, ``bulge_axis_ratio_col``, and to specify disk half-light ellipse
* ``nBulge``: Use ``bulge_n`` instead
* ``magVar``: Use ``mag_col`` instead
* ``sourceSelectionColName``: Use ``select_col`` instead

In `~lsst.cp.pipe.linearity.LinearitySolveTask` the configurations ``photodiodeIntegrationMethod`` and ``photodiodeCurrentScale`` have been moved to ``cpExtractPtcTask``.

In `~lsst.pipe.base.config.PipelineTaskConfig` the configuration ``saveMetadata`` is deprecated.
