.. _release-latest:
.. _release-v27-0-0:

###########################
Release 27.0.0 (2024-06-25)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v27_0_0

+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                    | Identifier |
+===========================================+============+
| Git tag                                   | 27.0.0     |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/newinstall>` | v27\_0\_0  |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                         | 8.0.0      |
+-------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2024_16`` weekly build with 3 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v27_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-431) <https://dmtr-431.lsst.io>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `Community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_v27.0.0_2024_06_26_00.56.30

.. _release-v27-0-0-functionality:

Major new features
==================

- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-cell-coadd`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-source-injection`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-obs-fiber-spectrograph`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-obs-generic-camera`

.. _release-v27-0-0-cell-coadd:

Cell Coadds Package
-------------------

The `cell_coadds <https://github.com/lsst/cell_coadds>`_ package includes data structures for defining coadds of astronomical images in small (few arcsecond) cells, in which only input images that fully contain a cell are included.
This helps mitigate problems with PSF discontinuities that are present in traditional coadds.

Pipeline tasks that use these data structures to actually build cell-based coadds are in development as of this release and maybe be usable, but they are not stable and are not included in the main DRP pipelines.

.. _release-v27-0-0-obs-fiber-spectrograph:

Ingestion of Fiber Spectrograph Data
------------------------------------

The `obs_fiberspectrograph` package adds support for data from fiber spectrographs that Rubin Observatory uses to monitor calibration light sources.

.. _release-v27-0-0-obs-generic-camera:

Support for Generic Cameras
----------------------------

The `obs_rubinGenericCamera` package adds support for data from the generic cameras used at Rubin Observatory, including the star trackers, the AuxTel pointing camera, and the all-sky camera.

.. _release-v27-0-0-source-injection:

Source Injection
----------------

The ``source_injection`` package (`GitHub <<https://github.com/lsst/source_injection>`_, `documentation <lsst.source.injection>`) contains tools designed to assist in the injection of synthetic sources into scientific imaging at various points in the Rubin pipelines.
Source generation and subsequent source injection is powered by the GalSim software package.

.. _release-v27-0-0-interface:

Significant interface changes
=============================

.. _release-v27-0-0-new-packages:

New packages added
------------------

* `cell_coadds <https://github.com/lsst/cell_coadds>`_ (see :ref:`above <release-v27-0-0-cell-coadd>`)
* `obs_fiberspectrograph <https://github.com/lsst/obs_fiberspectrograph>`_ (see :ref:`above <release-v27-0-0-obs-fiber-spectrograph>`)
* `obs_rubinGenericCamera <https://github.com/lsst/obs_rubinGenericCamera>`_, (see :ref:`above <release-v27-0-0-obs-generic-camera>`)
* `source_injection <https://github.com/lsst/source_injection>`_ (see :ref:`above <release-v27-0-0-source-injection>`)
* `scarlet_lite <https://github.com/lsst/scarlet_lite>`_, an optimized subset of the original Scarlet package used and maintained by Rubin DM.

.. _release-v27-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages removed
----------------

- `scarlet_extensions <https://github.com/lsst/scarlet_extensions>`_, obsolete scarlet utilities.

Task and Data Product changes
-----------------------------

* The Alert Production pipelines now use the new `~lsst.pipe.tasks.calibrateImage.CalibrationImageTask` for PSF modeling, background, subtraction, and initiall calibration immediately after ISR, instead of the two-task sequence of `~lsst.pipe.tasks.characterizeImage.CharacterizeImageTask` and `~lsst.pipe.tasks.calibrate.CalibrateTask`.
  The new task is leaner and simpler, and it can handle pairs of "snaps", but its output data products are slightly different.
  It will be included in the Data Release Production pipelines in a future release.

.. _release-v27-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

These tasks or methods are now deprecated and will be removed in the next major release.
See :jira:`RFC-945` for a clarification on the accelerated deprecation policy.

- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-deprecated-meas-base`
- :ref:`release-v27-0-0-deprecated-configurations`

.. _release-v27-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks:

Deprecations in lsst.pipe.tasks
-------------------------------

The python classes `~lsst.pipe.tasks.setPrimaryFlags.SetPrimaryFlagsConfig` and `~lsst.pipe.tasks.setPrimaryFlags.SetPrimaryFlagsConfig` have been moved to `lsst.meas.algorithms`.

.. _release-v27-0-0-deprecated-meas-base:

Deprecations in lsst.meas.base
------------------------------

The plugin `NaiveCentroid` is deprecated.

.. _release-v27-0-0-deprecated-configurations:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

In `~lsst.fgcmcal.FgcmFitCycleConfig` the configuration field ``nCore`` will be removed. Please specify the number of cores with ``pipetask run --cores-per-quantum`` instead.

In `~lsst.analysis.tools.tasks.CatalogMatchConfig`: ``targetDecColumn`` has been been replaced by ``targetRaColumn`` and ``decColumn`` has been replaced by ``targetDecColumn``.