.. _release-v28-0-0:

###########################
Release 28.0.2 (2025-03-25)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v28_0_0

+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                     | Identifier |
+============================================+============+
| Git tag                                    | 28.0.2     |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/lsstinstall>` | v28\_0\_2  |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                          | 9.0.0      |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2024_42`` weekly build with 5 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v28_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-451) <https://dmtr-451.lsst.io>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `Community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_v28.0.0_2025_01_24_05.17.48

.. _release-v28-0-0-functionality:

Major new features
==================

- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-lsstinstall`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-platform`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-middleware`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-multiprofit`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-analysis-ap`

.. _release-v28-0-0-lsstinstall:

Supported installation method
-----------------------------

Installation with ``newinstall.sh`` is no longer supported. Please use :doc:`lsstinstall </install/lsstinstall>`.

.. _release-v28-0-0-platform:

Platform compatibility
----------------------

AlmaLinux 9 replaces CentOS 7 as official development, test and operation platform.

.. _release-v28-0-0-middleware:

Notable middleware improvements
-------------------------------

* Added new ``Butler`` interfaces to simplify queries and collection management. See ``Butler.collections``, ``Butler.query_datasets``, ``Butler.query_data_ids``, and ``Butler.query_dimension_records``. The new ``query_*`` interface uses a brand new query system that supports region and RA/Dec queries and they all support sorting and limit. It is recommended to migrate away from ``Butler.registry.query*`` interfaces.
* There have been many improvements to the ``pipetask report`` command.

.. _release-v28-0-0-multiprofit:

Multiprofit source modelling
-----------------------------

:doc:`lsst.multiprofit </modules/lsst.multiprofit/index>` adds a python interface to the MultiProFit astronomical source modelling code and can be used through :doc:`lsst.meas.extensions.multiprofit </modules/lsst.meas.extensions.multiprofit/index>`, which  implements separate tasks for PSF and source model fitting.

.. _release-v28-0-0-analysis-ap:

New package analysis_ap
-----------------------

Adds scripts and pipelines to compute quality assurance metrics and the ability to make plots for studying the alerts pipeline output products with focus on human-driven analysis of DiaSources and DiaObjects written to the PPDB/APDB; for automatic metric and plot generation on butler outputs during processing runs, see `~lsst.analysis.tools.tasks.AssocDiaSrcDetectorVisitAnalysisTask` and related Tasks and Pipelines in :doc:`lsst.analysis.tools </modules/lsst.analysis.tools/index>`.

.. _release-v28-0-0-interface:

Significant interface changes
=============================

.. _release-v28-0-0-new-packages:

New packages added
------------------

* `analysis_ap <https://github.com/lsst/analysis_ap>`_ (see :ref:`above <release-v28-0-0-analysis-ap>`).
* `modelfit_parameters <https://github.com/lsst/modelfit_parameters>`_: A library for defining parameters used in fitting parametric models.
* `gauss2d <https://github.com/lsst/gauss2d>`_ and `gauss2d_fit <https://github.com/lsst/gauss2d_fit>`_: Packages for defining and evaluating 2D Gaussian mixtures and images thereof.
* `multiprofit <https://github.com/lsst/multiprofit>`_ and `meas_extensions_multiprofit <https://github.com/lsst/meas_extensions_multiprofit>`_ (see :ref:`above <release-v28-0-0-multiprofit>`).
* `rucio_register <https://github.com/lsst/rucio_register>`_: Command and API to add Butler specific information to Rucio metadata.

.. _release-v28-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages removed
----------------

* `proxmin <https://github.com/lsst/proxmin>`_ and `scarlet <https://github.com/lsst/scarlet>`_ are obsolete with the adoption of scarlet\_lite.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-verify`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ip-isr`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-obs-chft`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-meas-extensions-shapeHSM`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ep-pipe`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ctrl-mpexec`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-analysis-tools`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-cp-pipe`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-lsst-skymap`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ip-diffim`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-analysis-ap`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-daf-butler`
- :ref:`release-v28-0-0-deprecated-configurations`

These tasks or methods are now deprecated and will be removed in the next major release.
See :jira:`RFC-945` for a clarification on the accelerated deprecation policy.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-verify:

Deprecations in lsst.verify
---------------------------

`~lsst.verify.tasks.ConfigApdbLoader` is deprecated. Please use `~lsst.verify.tasks.ApdbMetricConfig.apdb_config_url`.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ip-isr:

Deprecations in lsst.ip.isr
---------------------------

``isrTask*.makeBinnedImages`` are no longer used. Please subtask ``BinExposureTask`` instead.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-obs-chft:

Deprecations in lsst.obs.chft
-----------------------------

``CfhtIsrTask.makeBinnedImages`` is no longer used. Please subtask ``BinExposureTask`` instead.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-meas-extensions-shapeHSM:

Deprecations in lsst.meas.extensions.shapeHSM
---------------------------------------------

The ``shearType`` setters are deprecated.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ep-pipe:

Deprecations in lsst.ap.pipe
----------------------------

``createApFakes.CreateRandomApFakesTask`` is replaced by :doc:`source_injection </modules/lsst.source.injection/index>` tasks.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-pipe-tasks:

Deprecations in lsst.pipe.tasks
-------------------------------

The following tasks are replaced by :doc:`source_injection </modules/lsst.source.injection/index>` tasks:

* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.matchFakes.MatchFakesTask`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.insertFakes.InsertFakesTask`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.processCcdWithFakes.ProcessCcdWithFakesTask`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.processCcdWithFakes.ProcessCcdWithVariableFakesTask`

The following unused classes in ``diff_matched_tract_catalog`` will be removed:

* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.MeasurementType`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.Statistic`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.Median`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.SigmaIQR`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.SigmaMAD`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.Percentile`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.SourceType`
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.MatchType`

In `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.DiffMatchedTractCatalogConfig` the attribute ``compute_stats`` will be removed.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ctrl-mpexec:

Deprecations in lsst.ctrl.mpexec
--------------------------------

`~lsst.ctrl.mpexec.pipeline2dot` and `~lsst.ctrl.mpexec.graph2dot` should now be imported from ``lsst.pipe.base.dot_tools`` and will be removed.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-analysis-tools:

Deprecations in lsst.analysis.tools
-----------------------------------

`~lsst.analysis.tools.actions.vector.TreecorrConfig` is no longer a part of :doc:`analysis_tools </modules/lsst.analysis.tools/index>` (see :jira:`DM-45899`).

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-cp-pipe:

Deprecations in lsst.cp.pipe
----------------------------

`~lsst.cp.pipe.OverscanModel`. `~lsst.cp.pipe.SimpleModel`, `~lsst.cp.pipe.SimulatedModel`, `~lsst.cp.pipe.SegmentSimulator` and `~lsst.cp.pipe.SegmentSimulator` moved to ``lsst.ip.isr.deferredCharge``, and will be removed.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-lsst-skymap:

Deprecations in lsst.skymap
---------------------------

The functions ``angToCoord``, ``coordToAnge`` and classes ``HealpixTractInfo``, ``HealpixSkyMapConfig``, ``HealpixSkyMap`` will be removed.
``getInnerSkyPolygon/inner_sky_polygon`` are deprecated in favor of `~lsst.skymap.TractInfo.inner_sky_region`.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-ip-diffim:

Deprecations in lsst.ip.diffim
------------------------------

The plugin ``NativeDipoleCentroid`` is deprecated.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-daf-butler:

Deprecations in daf.butler
--------------------------

``Butler.collections`` should no longer be used to get the list of default collections.
Use ``Butler.collections.default`` instead.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-analysis-ap:

Deprecations in lsst.analysis.ap
--------------------------------

``legacyPlotUtils`` will be removed.

.. _release-v28-0-0-deprecated-configurations:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

These configurations are deprecated:

* `~lsst.ip.diffim.AlardLuptonPreconvolveSubtractConfig`: ``badSourceFlags`` in favor of seeting the equivalent field for the sourceSelector subtask instead.
* `~lsst.ip.isr.IsrStatisticsTaskConfig`: ``doApplyGainsForCtiStatistics``.
* `~lsst.ip.isr.DeferredChargeConfig`: ``useGains``.
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.characterizeImage.CharacterizeImageConfig`: subtasks ``doComputeSummaryStats`` moved to `~lsst.pipe.tasks.calibrate.CalibrateTask` and ``doMaskStreaks`` moved to `~lsst.ip.diffim.DetectAndMeasureTask`.
* `~lsst.pipe.tasks.diff_matched_tract_catalog.DiffMatchedTractCatalogConfig`: ``column_ref_extended``, ``column_ref_extended_inverted``, ``column_ref_extended_inverted``, ``column_target_extended`` and ``compute_stats``.
* `~lsst.cp.pipe.CpCtiSolveConfig`: ``useGains``.
* `~lsst.cp.pipe.LinearitySolveConfig`: ``ignorePtcMask``.
* `~lsst.cp.pipe.PhotonTransferCurveExtractConfig`: ``minMeanSignal`` and ``maxMeanSignal``.
* `~lsst.ap.association.TransformDiaSourceCatalogConfig`: ``doPackFlags``.
* `~lsst.ap.association.DiaPipelineConfig`: ``apdb`` has been replaced by ``apdb_config_url``.
* `~lsst.ap.association.LoadDiaCatalogsConfig`: ``pixelMargin`` has been replaced by ``angleMargin``, ``doLoadForcedSources``.
* `~lsst.ap.association.FilterDiaSourceCatalogConfig`: ``doWriteTrailedSources``. Trailed sources will not be written out during production.
