.. _release-v29-0-0:

###########################
Release 29.0.1 (2025-05-05)
###########################

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   tickets/v29_0_0

+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| Source                                     | Identifier |
+============================================+============+
| Git tag                                    | 29.0.1     |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| :doc:`EUPS distrib </install/lsstinstall>` | v29\_0\_1  |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+
| rubin-env version                          | 10.0.0     |
+--------------------------------------------+------------+

This release is based on the ``w_2025_12`` weekly build with 57 tickets backported.

The notes below highlight significant technical changes to the Science Pipelines codebase in this release.
For a complete list of changes made, see :doc:`tickets/v29_0_0`.

The `Characterization Metric Report (DMTR-461) <https://dmtr-461.lsst.io>`_ describes the scientific performance of this release in terms of scientific performance metrics.

If you have questions or comments about this release, visit our `Community forum <https://community.lsst.org>`_ for advice.

- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-functionality`
- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-interface`
- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-deprecations`

*See also:*

- :doc:`Installation instructions </install/index>`
- :doc:`Known issues </known-issues>`
- `Doxygen Documentation`__

__ http://doxygen.lsst.codes/stack/doxygen/xlink_v29.0.1_2025_04_17_04.49.14/

.. _release-v29-0-0-functionality:

Major new features
==================

- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-middleware`
- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-new-packages`

Notable middleware improvements
-------------------------------


.. _release-v29-0-0-new-packages:

New packages added
------------------

* `daf_butler_admin <https://github.com/lsst-dm/daf_butler_admin>`_:  implements a Butler plugin defining sub-commands that support various administration tasks for Butler databases.
* `dax_images_cutout <https://github.com/lsst/dax_images_cutout>`_ and `estdata_image_cutouts <https://github.com/lsst/estdata_image_cutouts>`_`: provides tasks that extract subsets of LSST image datasets for an IVOA image cutout service
* `sdm_tools <https://github.com/lsst/sdm_tools>`_: command line utilities for working with YAML schema files.


.. _release-v29-0-0-packages-removed:

Packages removed
----------------

* `analysis_drp <https://github.com/lsst/analysis_drp>`_: functionality has been ported to `analysis_tools <https://github.com/lsst/analysis_tools>`_.

.. _release-v29-0-0-deprecations:

Deprecations
============

- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-deprecated-afw`
- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-deprecated-drp-tasks`
- :ref:`release-v29-0-0-deprecated-configurations`

These tasks or methods are now deprecated and will be removed in the next major release.
See :jira:`RFC-945` for a clarification on the accelerated deprecation policy.

.. _release-v29-0-0-deprecated-afw:

Deprecations in afw.image.PhotoCalib
------------------------------------

The includeScaleUncertainty option dioes nothing and is deprecated.

.. _release-v29-0-0-deprecated-drp-tasks:

Deprecations in drp.tasks
-------------------------




.. _release-v29-0-0-deprecated-configurations:

Deprecated task configurations
------------------------------

These configurations are deprecated:


